Pet Pulse Setup Notes
=====================

Step 1: Create the React client app
Command used:
  npm create vite@latest client -- --template react

Why this was used:
  This creates the frontend project inside the client folder using Vite's React template.
  Vite provides a fast development server, modern build tooling, and a simple project structure for React apps.

Dependencies added by the scaffold/install:
  react
    Used to build the frontend user interface with reusable components and state-driven rendering.

  react-dom
    Used to render the React app into the browser DOM.

Development dependencies added:
  vite
    Provides the local development server and production build pipeline.

  @vitejs/plugin-react
    Adds React support to Vite, including JSX handling and React Fast Refresh during development.

  eslint
    Runs static code checks to catch common JavaScript and React issues.

  @eslint/js
    Provides the base ESLint JavaScript rule configuration.

  eslint-plugin-react-hooks
    Enforces the Rules of Hooks for React components.

  eslint-plugin-react-refresh
    Helps ensure components are compatible with React Fast Refresh.

  globals
    Provides predefined global variable sets for linting browser and modern JavaScript code.

  @types/react
    Provides TypeScript type definitions for React, useful for editor IntelliSense and tooling even in mixed JS projects.

  @types/react-dom
    Provides TypeScript type definitions for React DOM APIs.

Step 2: Install client dependencies
Command used:
  cd client
  npm install

Why this was used:
  Installs all packages listed in client/package.json and creates client/package-lock.json for reproducible installs.

Step 3: Install frontend styling, routing, icon, and animation libraries
Command used:
  cd client
  npm install @tailwindcss/vite tailwindcss framer-motion gsap lucide-react react-router-dom

Why this was used:
  Adds the main UI support libraries needed for styling, page navigation, icons, and animations in the React client.

Dependencies added:
  @tailwindcss/vite
    Connects Tailwind CSS to the Vite build pipeline so Tailwind styles can be processed during development and production builds.

  tailwindcss
    Provides utility-first CSS classes for building responsive, consistent UI styling quickly.

  framer-motion
    Provides React animation primitives for component transitions, layout animations, and interactive motion effects.

  gsap
    Provides timeline-based animation tools for more advanced or highly controlled visual effects.

  lucide-react
    Provides a clean React icon set for buttons, navigation, cards, and other UI elements.

  react-router-dom
    Provides client-side routing so the app can navigate between pages without full browser reloads.

Step 4: Create the backend Node project
Command used:
  mkdir backend
  cd backend
  npm init -y

Why this was used:
  Creates a separate backend package for the server-side API and generates backend/package.json.

Backend package settings added:
  "type": "module"
    Enables ES module import/export syntax in backend JavaScript files.

  "start": "node server.js"
    Runs the backend server in normal mode.

  "dev": "nodemon server.js"
    Runs the backend server in development mode with automatic restarts when files change.

Step 5: Install backend API, database, auth, and security dependencies
Command used:
  cd backend
  npm install express mongoose dotenv cors bcryptjs jsonwebtoken helmet

Why this was used:
  Adds the core packages needed to build an Express API, connect to MongoDB, manage environment variables, support frontend requests, and handle authentication/security concerns.

Dependencies added:
  express
    Provides the backend web server and routing layer for API endpoints.

  mongoose
    Provides MongoDB object modeling, schemas, validation, and database queries.

  dotenv
    Loads environment variables from a .env file, such as database URLs, JWT secrets, and server ports.

  cors
    Enables controlled cross-origin requests so the React client can call the backend API.

  bcryptjs
    Hashes passwords before storing them and compares submitted passwords during login.

  jsonwebtoken
    Creates and verifies JWT tokens for user authentication and protected routes.

  helmet
    Adds common HTTP security headers to reduce basic web security risks.

Step 6: Install backend development watcher
Command used:
  cd backend
  npm install -D nodemon

Why this was used:
  Adds automatic server restarts during backend development so code changes do not require manually stopping and starting Node.

Development dependency added:
  nodemon
    Watches backend files and restarts server.js whenever code changes.

Step 7: Install backend file upload, cloud media, and email dependencies
Command used:
  cd backend
  npm install cloudinary multer multer-storage-cloudinary nodemailer

Why this was used:
  Adds support for receiving uploaded files, storing media in Cloudinary, and sending emails from the backend.

Dependencies added:
  cloudinary
    Provides the Cloudinary SDK for uploading, managing, and retrieving hosted media assets such as pet images or profile photos.

  multer
    Handles multipart/form-data requests, which are commonly used for file uploads in Express APIs.

  multer-storage-cloudinary
    Connects Multer uploads directly to Cloudinary storage instead of saving uploaded files only on the local server.

  nodemailer
    Sends emails from the backend, such as verification emails, password reset emails, notifications, or contact messages.

Step 8: Install frontend API, server-state, and client-state libraries
Command used:
  cd client
  npm install axios @tanstack/react-query @tanstack/react-query-devtools zustand

Why this was used:
  Adds frontend tools for calling backend APIs, caching server responses, debugging data-fetching behavior, and managing shared client-side state.

Dependencies added:
  axios
    Provides a promise-based HTTP client for making requests from the React app to the backend API.

  @tanstack/react-query
    Manages server state such as API loading, caching, refetching, retries, and synchronization with backend data.

  @tanstack/react-query-devtools
    Provides development tools for inspecting React Query caches, request states, and refetch behavior while building the app.

  zustand
    Provides lightweight client-side state management for shared UI/session state that does not belong in the server cache.
